you've read this as well I'm telling you
this tonight with force we are people of
builders we will rebuild the Notre Dame
Cathedral the relics are important
whether or not it really was Jesus's
crown of thorns for instance who knows
what's important is that it was a focus
of faith
a focus of people's prayers it will
never be reasonable apparently to say
hey wait if modern people are gonna
devote 1 billion US dollars to this
maybe it should be repurposed to serve a
legitimate function in modern society
900 million euros 900 million this is
currently over 1 billion u.s. dollars
this is a number so large that were
primarily accustomed to discussing the
morality of spending this much money in
the context of war now many of my
viewers will feel moral ambivalence
about the still ongoing war in
Afghanistan many of you will feel sense
of disgust and disappointment when you
think about the last 18 years of warfare
in Afghanistan
however moral or immoral you feel that
fight is right now there's a war in
Afghanistan to prevent a religious
fundamentalist theocracy from ruling
over secular free thinking people
however few there are in Afghanistan I
don't know if it's 1% or 1/2 of 1% or if
it's all of 5% of the people of
Afghanistan but some of them some are
free thinking people who don't want to
live under the Dominion of the Taliban
now I ask you what is a more moral use
of money what is a more ethical use of
900 million euros rebuilding this
Cathedral this monument to the pious
ignorance of the dark ages
to the worship of the fragment of the
true cross or taking that same amount of
money and devoting it now to helping the
people of Afghanistan
perhaps 900 million might be donated
just to help now people escape people
who don't want to live under the
Dominions of Tellman to provide some
kind of alternate life for them because
now America is giving up and going home
and pretty much everyone in foreign
policy in politics has admitted to
themselves that gradually our rapidly
Afghanistan will revert to being a
brutal religious dictatorship what would
you do with 1 billion dollars with 900
million euros its roof beams came from
French forests that no longer exist
now those beams don't either but some of
its priceless artifacts were rescued by
firefighters and clergy who formed a
human chain to carry them to safety
these included the crown of thorns which
Jesus is believed to have worn on the
cross Lucinda Laird is Dean of the
American Cathedral in Paris it's brought
out in all of us how much we care not
just about the building which is
gorgeous and historic but about what it
stands for
Paris France Europe the world tradition
Christian faith at its finest the relics
are important whether or not it really
was Jesus's crown of thorns for instance
who knows what's important is that it
was a focus of faith a focus of people's
prayers for hundreds of years so the
things themselves are not so important
as what they stand for what they mean to
people the faith they evoke and why is
it that so-called atheist activists
people who are supposedly advocating for
a secular future like Richard Dawkins
here why is it that none of them object
why is it that all of them now want to
show how pious and sensitive and
concerned they are that the cultural
heritage of Christianity of Christendom
should go on forever and ever that that
they really feel people in the streets
of Paris in the year 2500 in the distant
future our grandchildren's grandchildren
that people in the future should walk
the streets being surrounded by these
monuments to the faith of the Dark Age
forever and ever even if it's at
taxpayers expense even if it's 900
million from donors that it should never
end
is that how you feel that's not how I
feel where do I meet a theists who are
real atheists where do I meet a theists
who have even a fraction of the vision
and attitude of a rational future that
they already had in France near 1789
near 1791 when they wrote a new
constitution in 1791 that declared the
people will elect their own priests the
pre-peeled people within their own
church within their own group will have
the right to elect who gets to speak at
the pulpit there will be no more affair
authoritarian top-down control of
religion from Rome or anywhere else and
in the same Constitution it declares
that all the property of the church will
henceforth be taken away and treated as
public property would be taken by by the
government there is a radical change
there's a there was a group of people
back in 1789 who were thinking about the
future of France and who didn't want it
to be a kind of fake Disneyland devoted
to the medieval past because guess what
if you spend 900 million euros you don't
get an authentic architectural Monument
you don't get to relive the past what
you get is something just as fake as a
castle at Disneyland you get a
simulation of the past and it's not a
museum challenging the past or educating
people no no no no no no you're going to
spend this money just to recreate
something odious and oppressive that we
should be in a visionary way thinking of
a better future a better way well for
what France is supposed to be five
hundred years from now we should be
thinking about the future with some of
the vision some of the challenge to
tradition some of the sheer reckless
rationality that the French had back in
1789 and that seemingly nobody has any
more back in 1789 people were saying in
France hey we don't want our calendar to
reflect a bunch of religious concepts
from the medieval past a bunch of errors
and just broken assumptions we want to
have a calendar that's
secular and rational and makes sense and
we want we want a calendar that doesn't
memorialize the past we want a calendar
that's rational and makes sense for the
future that's what they were saying back
in 1789 and France itself has drifted so
far away from these ideals that this is
now shocking and unthinkable and
shocking and unthinkable within the
internet forums that are for atheist
activists it's hilarious to me
to see on Reddit slash atheist
supposedly a forum for atheist activists
not only a declaration that the atheists
completely support you know the
reconstruction of the notre-dame
Cathedral
but then this post they they turned off
comments they control comments and quite
rapidly afterwards put up and they
stated that it was the policy it was the
policy of that reddit forum that
everyone participating had to believe
this and anyone with a with a view to
the contrary would have their comments
to their posts deleted now if that were
a forum for pious Catholics or for
Christians I'd have no objection it
would make sense
these are atheists these are
self-identified a theist atheist
activists but they're the same people
who when they think of the future think
that atheists can just go on celebrating
Christmas forever and ever who think
that atheists can comfortably walk the
streets of Montreal and can walk the
streets of Saudi Arabia and Indonesia
forever and ever
surrounded by church ekit architecture
and mosque architecture that those
buildings will never be repurposed
they'll never serve another social
function that whether it's at taxpayers
expense or the generosity of private
donors that billions and billions will
be spent no matter how many fires or
earthquakes destroy that architectural
heritage to rebel
it will never be reasonable apparently
to say hey wait if modern people are
gonna devote 1 billion US dollars to
this maybe it should be repurposed to
serve a legitimate function in modern
society whether that's as a museum that
really analyzes and exposes the evil of
the Christian medieval paths
or you tell me something positive dad
[Music]